Drucker-Prager Elastoplasticity for Sand Animation

Gergely Kla´r     Theodore Gast     Andre Pradhana     Chuyuan Fu     Craig Schroeder     Chenfanfu 
Jiang     Joseph Teran
University of California, Los Angeles


Abstract

Figure 1: Sand falls through the narrow neck of an hourglass, accumulating at the bottom.

level  of  accuracy  when  animating  scenes  like  beaches  or  play-
grounds. Sand and many other similar everyday materials like salt,


We simulate sand dynamics using an elastoplastic, continuum as-
sumption.   We  demonstrate  that  the  Drucker-Prager  plastic  flow
model combined with a Hencky-strain-based hyperelasticity accu-
rately recreates a wide range of visual sand phenomena with mod-
erate computational expense.   We use the Material Point Method
(MPM) to discretize the governing equations for its natural treat-
ment  of  contact,  topological  change  and  history  dependent  con-
stitutive relations.  The Drucker-Prager model naturally represents
the frictional relation between shear and normal stresses through
a yield stress criterion.  We develop a stress projection algorithm
used for enforcing this condition with a non-associative flow rule
that works naturally with both implicit and explicit time integra-
tion.   We  demonstrate  the  efficacy  of  our  approach  on  examples
undergoing large deformation, collisions and topological changes
necessary for producing modern visual effects.

Keywords:  MPM, APIC, elastoplasticity, sand, granular

Concepts:    Computing methodologies       Physical simulation;

Continuous simulation;

1    Introduction

Sand dynamics are ubiquitous in every day environments. Its char-
acteristic flowing and piling motions must be recreated with a high

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for per-
sonal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstract-
ing with credit is permitted.   To copy otherwise,  or republish,  to post on
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee.  Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.   c  2016 Copyright
held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
SIGGRAPH ’16 Technical Paper,, July 24 - 28, 2016, Anaheim, CA,
ISBN: 978-1-4503-4279-7/16/07

DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2897824.2925906

ACM Reference Format

Klár, G., Gast, T., Pradhana, A., Fu, C., Schroeder, C., Jiang, C., Teran, J. 2016. Drucker-Prager 
Elastoplas-
ticity                                                                                              
                                                                           for Sand Animation. ACM 
Trans. Graph. 35, 4, Article 103 (July 2016), 12 pages.

DOI = 10.1145/2897824.2925906 http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2897824.2925906.

powder, rubble, etc are granular materials composed of many dis-
crete macroscopic grains colliding and sliding against one another.
These materials exhibit complex behaviors with aspects compara-
ble to both fluids (e.g.  they can assume the shape of a container)
and solids (they can support weight and form stable piles) [Jaeger
et al. 1996; Bardenhagen et al. 2000].

Unfortunately, this complex material behavior makes it very diffi-
cult to develop numerical methods capable of reproducing sand dy-
namics. Given the incredibly high number of grains in practical sce-
narios, a continuum description of the governing equations is useful
for simulation. However, it is difficult to design a single constitutive
law that reproduces all sand behaviors. Furthermore, these laws are
relatively complex and require subtle aspects of elastic and plastic
response.  On the other hand, a Lagrangian view where all grains
are simulated only requires a description of the frictional contact
between grains.  Unfortunately, numerical methods designed from
this view would require the computationally prohibitive simulation
of many millions or even of billions of individual grains.  Further-
more, it is difficult to tune the grain frictional parameters to match
observed piling and flowing behaviors in everyday experiments.

We build on the work of Mast et al. [2013; 2014] and develop an im-
plicit version of their Drucker-Prager-based elastoplasticity model
for granular materials.  The Drucker-Prager conception of elasto-
plasticity is often used in the mechanical engineering literature for
granular materials [Drucker and Prager 1952],  and we show that
it can be adopted to animation applications with relatively simple
implementation and efficient runtimes.  This is useful because the
models are well developed and the literature can be consulted to re-
duce the difficulty of parameter tuning.  We use the Material Point
Method (MPM) [Sulsky et al. 1994] to discretize the model since it
provides a natural and efficient way of treating contact, topological
change and history dependent behavior. Furthermore, we show that
this can be done with little more effort than was used for simulating
snow dynamics in the MPM approach of Stomakhin et al.  [2013].
Lastly,  we  replace  the  particle/grid  transfers  used  by  Mast  et  al.
with APIC transfers [Jiang 2015; Jiang et al. 2015] and show that

ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 35, No. 4, Article 103, Publication Date: July 2016


103:2    •    G. Klár et al.

this allows for more stable behavior, particularly with simulations
that have higher numbers of particle per cell.

2    Related Work

and  conservation  of  momentum,  which  can  be  simplified  to  the
Euler-Lagrange equations,

ρ Dv  =        σ + ρg.                          (2)

Dt

Here,  we have used  Dφ  =   ∂φ + v · ∇φ to denote the material


Continuum  approaches  have  been  used  in  a  number  of  graphics
methods for granular materials.  Zhu and Bridson [2005] animate
sand as a continuum with a modified Particle-In-Cell fluid solver.
Narain et al.  [2010] improve on the method of Zhu and Bridson

derivative of an arbitrary function φ(x, y, z). The text of Gonzalez
and Stuart [2008] provides useful background for these equations.

Deformation gradient.  The deformation gradient represents how
deformed a material is locally.  For example, let x⁰ and x⁰ be two

by removing cohesion artifacts associated with incompressibility.                                   
                                                        1                2


Both  of  these  works  led  to  a  number  of  generalizations  and  im-
provements.  Nkulikiyimfura et al.  [2012] develop a GPU version
of the Zhu and Bridson approach.  Laenerts and Dutre [2009] use
an  SPH  version  to  couple  water  with  porous  granular  materials.
Aldua´n  and  Otaduy  [2011]  generalize  the  unilateral  incompress-
ibility developed by Narain et al.   to SPH. Imhsen et al.   [2013]
show  how  to  improve  the  convergence  of  the  method  of  Aldua´n
and Otaduy [2011] and also detail refinement of base simulations
to upscale to millions of grains. Chang et al. [2012] use a modified
Hooke’s law to handle friction between grains.

Many methods are developed by modeling interactions between in-
dividual grains or particle idealizations of grains, rather than from
a continuum.   Miller and Pearce [1989] simulate interactions be-
tween particles to model sand, solid and viscous behaviors. Luciani
et al. [1995] use a similar approach. Bell et al. [2005] got very im-
pressive results by simulating many sand grains as spherical rigid
bodies with friction.  Milenkovic [1996] also simulated individual
grains  to  solve  for  piles  of  rigid  materials  via  energy  minimiza-
tion/optimization.   Mazhar et al.   [2015] use Nestov’s method to
simulate millions of individual grains.   Yasuda et al.   [2008] use
the GPU to get real-time results with rigid grains.   Alduan et al.
[2009] use an adaptive resolution version of the method by Bell et
al.  [2005] to improve performance.  Macklin et al.  [2014] show
that the extremely efficient position based dynamics methods can
be applied by casting granular interactions as hard constraints in.

As a method that combines aspects of particle-based and grid-based
methods, MPM has proven to be a useful discretization choice for
granular materials, such as snow [Stomakhin et al. 2013] and sand
[Jiang et al. 2015].  It has also been used for more general elasto-
plastic  flows  for  computer  graphics  [Yue  et  al.  2015;  Stomakhin
et  al. 2014; Ram et al. 2015; Jiang 2015; Jiang et al. 2015] and engi-
neering applications [Mast 2013; Mast et al. 2014]. Brackbill et al.
[Bardenhagen et al. 2000; Cummins and Brackbill 2002] simulate
individual grains but use MPM to resolve collisions and friction.

When extreme computational efficiency is required, simplified ap-
proaches like height fields [Sumner et al. 1999; Onoue and Nishita

nearby points embedded in the material (see Figure 4) at the begin-
ning of the simulation, and let x1  and x2  be the same two points
in the current configuration. Then (x2      x1) = F(x⁰    x⁰). The
deformation gradient F evolves according to

DF  = (    v)F.                              (3)

Dt

Elastic and plastic deformation gradient.  We represent plastic-
ity by factoring deformation gradient into elastic and plastic parts
as F  =  FEFP .   The deformation gradient is a measure of how
a material has locally rotated and deformed due to its motion.  By
factoring the deformation gradient in this way, we divide this defor-
mation history into two pieces. The plastic part, FP , represents the
portion of the material’s history that has been forgotten.  If a metal
rod is bent into a coiled spring,  the rod forgets that it used to be
straight; the coiled spring behaves as though it was always coiled
(see Figure 6).  The twisting and bending involved in this opera-
tion is stored in FP . If the spring is compressed slightly, the spring
will feel strain (deformation). This is elastic deformation, which is
stored in FE. The spring remembers this deformation. In response,
the material exerts stress to try to restore itself to its coiled shape.
In this way, we see that only FE should be used to compute stress.
The full history of the metal rod consists of being bent into a spring
shape (FP ) and then being compressed (FE).

Constitutive model.  A constitutive model relating the state to the
stress is needed. The text of Bonet and Wood [2008] provides use-
ful background for elastoplastic constitutive modeling.  Following
Mast el al.  [2013;  2014],  we use Drucker-Prager elastoplasticity
[Drucker and Prager 1952].  The elastic part of this relation is ex-
pressed through the deformation gradient F.

For perfectly hyperelastic materials the constitutive relation is de-
fined through the potential energy, which increases with non-rigid
deformation from the initial state.  However, in the case of large-
strain elastoplasticity, there will be some permanent (or plastic) de-
formation and the potential will only increase for deformation be-
yond this state. In this case, the stress in the material is

1       ∂ψ    ET


2003; Li and Moshell 1993; Chen and Wong 2013; Chanclou et al.
1996]  and  cellular  automata  [Pla-Castells  et  al.  2006]  have  been

σ =  det(F) ∂FE F

(4)


used to provide real-time interaction.

3    Background

Conservation laws. We represent the sand as an elastoplastic con-
tinuum, whose state can be described at each location by its density
ρ(x, y, z)  and velocity v(x, y, z).   Our sand experiences internal
stress σ and gravity g.  The motion of the sand satisfies conserva-
tion of mass

Dρ + ρ     v = 0                                   (1)

Dt

ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 35, No. 4, Article 103, Publication Date: July 2016

where  ψ(FE)  is  the  elastic  energy  density  designed  to  penalize
non-rigid FE (see Section 6.3 for more detailed discussion).

With  the  Drucker-Prager  model,  frictional  interactions  between
grains of sand can be expressed in the continuum via a relation be-
tween shear and normal stresses. Using a Coulomb friction model,
shear stresses resisting sliding motions between grains can only be
as large as a constant times the normal stress holding them together.
For example, if shear stresses larger than this value are required to
maintain a static pile, plastic flow will commence when the limit is
reached and the material will move.  This constraint defines a fea-
sible region of stresses, the surface of the feasible region is often
referred to as the yield surface. The decomposition of the deforma-
tion gradient into elastic and plastic components F =  FEFP  can


103:3    •    Drucker-Prager Elastoplasticity for Sand Animation

Figure 2: A solid ball drops into a sandbox, spraying sand in all directions.


be viewed as a means of projecting the deformation to satisfy the
constraint.  Notably,  the projection must be designed carefully to
ensure for increase of entropy as well as volume preserving plastic
flow. We discuss the model in more detail in Section 7 as well as in
the supplementary technical document [Kla´r et al. 2016].

Discretization.  Traditional approaches for discretization are typ-
ically  either  Eulerian  or  Lagrangian,  which  differ  by  their  frame
of reference. An Eulerian description computes quantities of inter-
est at fixed locations in space.  These methods feature fixed grids.
Eulerian methods are ideal for handling collisions and changes in
topology, making them a popular choice for fluids.

A Lagrangian description uses quantities that move with the ma-
terial being described.   These methods tend to use moving parti-
cles often connected by a mesh.  This representation automatically
conserves mass,  and the mesh provides a straightforward way to
determine how deformed the material is.  Lagrangian methods are
preferred for elastic solids.

Some materials, such as sand, exhibit characteristics of both fluids
and solids. Sand can support a load like a solid, but it can also flow
like a liquid.  For materials like these, there is growing interest in

Figure 3: A sand castle is hit with a deformable ball while falling.
The sand and ball are fully coupled in the simulation.

hybrid methods, such as the Material Point Method, which combine
aspects of both types of discretization, seeking to obtain some of the
benefits of each.

The Material Point Method stores information on Lagrangian parti-
cles, but it computes forces using a fixed Eulerian grid. The use of
particles makes mass conservation trivial, and it provides a simple
means of moving information around.  The use of a fixed grid pro-
vides automatic handling of topology changes (merging and sep-
arating) and collisions between regions of material.   Since MPM
uses two distinct representations, information must be transferred
between them.   These transfers play a very important role in the
numerical behavior of a hybrid method.  Furthermore, to simplify
topology changes, MPM does not store connectivity between parti-
cles. This avoids the need for complex remeshing, but deformation
must now be tracked in an Eulerian way.

In the next section, we outline our discretization steps.

4    Overview

Before  presenting  the  algorithm  in  detail,  we  first  provide  an
overview  of  the  steps  that  are  involved  in  the  algorithm  and  the
role that they play, which is summarized in Figure 7.

1.  Transfer to grid.  Transfer mass and momentum from parti-
cles to the grid. Use mass and momentum to compute velocity
on the grid. (§5.1)

2.  Apply  forces.   Compute  elastic  forces  using  a  deformation
gradient that has been projected into the plastic yield surface
and apply the forces to the grid velocities. (§6)

3.  Grid collisions.  Project grid velocities for collisions against
scripted bodies and obstacles, ignoring friction (§8).  For im-
plicit, this is merged with the force application step (§5.6).

4.  Friction. Compute and apply friction based on the collisions
that were resolved. The velocity before and after this step are
retained for use during the transfers. (§8.1)

5.  Transfer to particles.  Transfer velocities from grid to parti-
cles, being careful to handle friction in a manner that does not
lead to inconsistencies. (§5.3)

6.  Update particles. Update remaining particle state, including
positions and deformation gradient. (§5.4)


0

2

0                                     b      x

b      x2
1

7.  Plasticity and hardening.  Project the deformation gradient
for plasticity, updating the elastic and plastic parts.  Perform
hardening, which updates the plastic yield surface. (§5.5)

5    Algorithm


Ω⁰                  Ω

Figure 4: Relationship between deformation and F.

Notation. It is helpful to establish the conventions for notation (see
Table 1 for a complete list).  Scalars are represented by non-bold
Latin or Greek characters (mp, αⁿ, Gk).  Vectors are represented

ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 35, No. 4, Article 103, Publication Date: July 2016


103:4    •    G. Klár et al.

Figure 5: A rake is dragged around a rock, producing a circular pattern in the sand.


by bold lowercase Latin characters (vⁿ, xⁿ⁺¹). Matrices are repre-

Particles                                           Grid

p      i


sented by bold uppercase Latin characters or bold Greek characters
(I, FˆP,n+1, σ). Derivatives alter this in the usual way, so that ∇Gki
is a vector and (∇v)p  is a matrix.

Many quantities are indexed with subscripts, which indicate where
quantities are stored.  Quantities that are stored at grid nodes are
indexed with i and particle quantities have the index p.  Collision-
related quantities have an index k relating them to a particular colli-
sion interaction. A quantity may have more than one subscript (wⁿ ,

Particle state

Particle velocity (§5.3)
Updated positions (§5.4)
Plasticity, hardening (§5.5)

Grid velocity, mass (§5.1)
Forces (§6)

Collisions (§8)
Friction (§8.1)


∇Gki).  The quantity Fp     represents the quantity corresponding
to one index, and ⟨Fⁿ⁺¹⟩ represents a vector of all such quantities.

Superscript n is used to indicate a quantity near the beginning of the
time step, before forces are applied, (mⁿ, Bⁿ).  Superscript n + 1

Figure 7: Overview of MPM stages.

the end of the previous time step.

i        p                                                       We also store the elastic and 
plastic components of the deformation


indicates a quantity near the end of the time step, after forces are

gradient, FE,ⁿ and FP,ⁿ. Note that while we use FE,ⁿ to compute


n+1      P,n+1

p                  p                                                          p


applied, (xi      , Fp       ).

Stars, tildes, and bars are used to distinguish intermediate quantities
(vˢ, v˜ⁿ⁺¹, vⁿ⁺¹), and some effort is made to group them, but the

forces, FP,ⁿ is not required and need not be stored.  For plasticity,
we must store one parameter αⁿ, which defines the size of the yield
surface and may change per particle as a result of hardening.

i       i               i


adornments do not have any intrinsic meaning.

Superscripts E and P are used to denote the elastic or plastic part

E,n      P,n

Weights.  We will frequently need to transfer information between
particle and grid representations.  We do this by associating with
each particle p and grid node i a weight wⁿ  which determines how


of a deformation gradient (Fp   , Fp   ).

Generally, quantities that are stored on particles have indicators of
time, and those that lack other adornments are state variables (αⁿ,

ip

strongly the particle and node interact. If the particle and grid node
are close together, the weight should be large.  If the particle and
node are farther apart,  the weight should be small.   We compute


FE,ⁿ, xⁿ; not vⁿ, FˆE,n+1). There are two exceptions to this. We

our weights based on a kernel as wⁿ

=  N (xⁿ − xⁿ), where xⁿ


p           p              i        p

n                                            and    ⁿ

ip                  p           i                       p


do not store the deformation gradient itself, so Fp  for us is not a

xi  are  the  locations  of  the  particle  and  grid  node  locations.


state variable.  The mass mp  is a state variable, but we omit a time

We will also need the spatial derivatives of our weights, ∇wⁿ  =

n          n


indicator because it never changes.  State variables are those that

persist from the end of one time step to the beginning of the next.

N (xp     xi ), when we compute forces. We use time indices on

the fixed grid node locations xⁿ to distinguish them from estimates
(such as xⁿ⁺¹) of where those nodes would end up if evolved with

Particle  state.    In  MPM,  the  primary  representation  of  state  is                           
ⁱ                                                         n


stored on particles.  We maintain mass m  , position xⁿ, velocity

node velocities.  We also indicate time on weights wip since they

p                        p                                 were computed using quantities at this 
time.

vⁿ, and affine momentum Bⁿ, which is related to the velocity spa-

p                                                    p


tial derivatives. The extra matrix Bⁿ stored per particle is used for
APIC transfers [Jiang et al. 2015]. Up to a constant scale, this quan-
tity approximates the spatial derivative of the grid velocity field at

original  rest  shape

Choosing a kernel N  leads to trade offs with respect to smooth-
ness,  computational  efficiency,  and  the  width  of  the  stencil.   We
prefer tensor product splines for their computational efficiency, as
they are relatively inexpensive to compute, differentiate, and store.
The  multilinear  kernel  typically  employed  for  FLIP  fluid  solvers
is the simplest of these options, but it is not suitable here.  There
are two reasons for this (see [Steffen et al. 2008]).  The first is that


FP                           ∇wip

would be discontinuous and produce discontinuous forces.

The second is that ∇wⁿ  may be far from zero when wⁿ  ≈ 0, lead-


F

new  rest  shape

FE

ing to large forces being applied to grid nodes with tiny weights.
Quadratic and cubic b-splines work well, and we choose cubic b-
splines for convenience. Our kernel is

 1 |x|3 − |x|2 + ²    0 ≤ |x| < 1

 2                            3


current  shape

Nˆ(x) =

1 (2 − |x|)³          1 ≤ |x| < 2

0                              2 ≤ |x|

(5)


Figure 6: Relationship between F, FE, and FP .

N (u) = Nˆ  ux  Nˆ  uy  Nˆ  uz  ,                      (6)

ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 35, No. 4, Article 103, Publication Date: July 2016


103:5    •    Drucker-Prager Elastoplasticity for Sand Animation

Figure 8: A stick is dragged through a bed of sand, tracing out a butterfly shape in the sand.


Variable                 Where                   Type                 Meaning

I                           -                       matrix               identity matrix

∆t                     -                        scalar                time step size

h                       -                        scalar                grid resolution

D                       -                            -                    material derivative

                 Dt                                                                                 
                                                                                                    
        

g                           -                       vector                gravity

Grid nodes far enough from any particle that they do not receive
mass are inactive and do not participate in any further computations.

The next task is to transfer velocity.   We do this using the APIC
transfers in [Jiang et al. 2015].  The velocity state on the particle
is represented by vⁿ and Bⁿ. The affine momentum Bⁿ is related

σ                        -                       matrix               Cauchy stress                 
                                                                                                    
                     p               p                                                      p


ρ                       -                        scalar                density

to the velocity spatial derivatives Cⁿ through Cⁿ =  Bⁿ(Dⁿ)−¹,

p                       p             p       p


v                           -                       vector                velocity

mp               particles†            scalar                particle mass

where Dⁿ is a matrix that behaves as an inertia tensor and is


⁰              particles†            scalar                initial particle volume

( h₂

cubic


αn , αn+1

particles†            scalar                yield surface size

n       Σ   n      n

	 

n       n          n  T              3  I

			


Fn , Fn+1

particles                 matrix               deformation gradient


p        p

E,n        E,n+1                       †

where h is the grid spacing.  Although the definition of the iner-


Fp      , Fp                   particles

matrix               elastic deformation gradient

n


FP,n , FP,n+1

particles†            matrix               plastic deformation gradient

tia tensor Dp  depends on the relative positions of the grid nodes

p             p


vn , vn+1

particles†            vector                particle velocity

and particles through a relatively high-degree polynomial (both ex-

p        p


xn , xn+1

particles†            vector                particle position

plicitly and through wⁿ ), it simplifies to a constant multiple of the

           p        p                                                                               
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
              ip


ⁿ                particles                 matrix               particle velocity derivative (APIC)

Dⁿ                particles                 matrix               affine inertia tensor (APIC)

identity in the cases of the quadratic and cubic splines presented.

With Cⁿ, we can define an affine velocity field v  (x) for particle p


ˆn+1

p

particles                 matrix               deformation gradient, before plasticity              
                                                p                                                   
                             p


FˆE,n+1

particles                 matrix               elastic deformation gradient, before plasticity

by vp(x) = vp + Cⁿ(x − xⁿ). The momentum contribution from


ˆP,n+1

p

particles                 matrix               plastic deformation gradient, before plasticity


(∇v)p            particles                 matrix               grid-based velocity gradient

vp                particles                 vector                particle affine velocity field

Zp                particles       matrix → matrix      project to yield surface

Nˆ(x)

mⁿ                   grid                     scalar                grid node mass

                       i                                                                            
                                                                                                    
             

vⁿ                   grid                     vector                rasterized velocity

                     i                                                                              
                                                                                                    
            


vn+1

grid                     vector                final grid velocity, no friction

                  i                                                                                 
                                                                                                    
            


v˜n+1

grid                     vector                final grid velocity

                  i                                                                                 
                                                                                                    
            

vʸ                    grid                     vector                velocity with explicit forces

                      i                                                                             
                                                                                                    
             


xⁿ                   grid                     vector                Cartesian grid node locations

Figure 9:  Cubic (blue) and quadratic (red) splines used for com-


n+1

i

grid                     vector                grid positions moved by vⁿ⁺¹

puting interpolation weights.


fi                    grid           matrix → vector      compute forces

λk                      -                        scalar                Lagrange multiplier for 
enforcing collision

Gk                     -              vector → scalar       collision criterion

∇Gki                grid           vector → vector      collision criterion gradient

E = 1kPa

Nˆ                     -               scalar → scalar       interpolation spline


N                      -              vector → scalar       tensor product interpolation spline

∇N                    -              vector → scalar       tensor product interpolation spline 
gradient

wip                 mixed                   scalar                interpolation weight

∇wip               mixed                   vector                interpolation weight gradient

Table 1: Table of notation used in this paper. †These quantities are
state on particles.

where h is the grid spacing. Sometimes the quadratic kernel is also
useful. We plot the quadratic and cubic kernels in Figure 9. We use
the cubic spline for all of our examples.

5.1    Transfer to grid

The first step of each time step is the transfer of state particles to
the fixed Cartesian grid. We begin by distributing the mass of each
particle to its neighboring grid nodes.

mn  = Σ wn mp                                           (7)

E = 10kPa

E = 100kPa

E = 1000kPa

Figure 10: This simulation shows the effects of Young’s modulus on
the behavior of a simulation. Sand with a very low Young’s modulus
tends to be bouncy.  The behavior is more like sand as the Young’s

ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 35, No. 4, Article 103, Publication Date: July 2016


103:6    •    G. Klár et al.


Figure 11: A shovel digs through sand and pushes it aside.

particle p to node i is wⁿ mpvp(xⁿ). This leads to the full form of
the velocity transfer,

Figure 12:  Sand is poured from a spout into a pile in a lab (left)
and with our method (right).

vⁿ =    1   Σ wⁿ m  (vⁿ + Bⁿ(Dⁿ)−¹(xⁿ − xⁿ))      (9)

		

of Fⁿ rather than Fⁿ itself. These are related by Fⁿ = FE,ⁿFP,ⁿ

p                            p                                                            p         
  p         p


5.2    Grid update

(  7).  During this evolution step, we assume that the plastic part is

not changing (Fˆn+1  = Fⁿ), which gives us the rule

p                p


We next update velocities on the grid. This involves applying forces

approaches for doing this,  explicit and implicit.   For most of our
examples, explicit is more efficient, since we are running with rela-
tively low stiffness. For stiff examples, implicit becomes advisable.
We defer the implicit formulation until (§5.6).

Explicit The simplest approach for handling forces is explicit.  In
this case, we compute and apply an explicit force (§6)

FˆE,n+1  = FE,ⁿ + ∆t(∇v)  FE,ⁿ.               (16)

The plastic update is covered in (§7).

Note that the update of the particle position and deformation gra-
dient use vⁿ⁺¹ while the velocity and related quantities use v˜ⁿ⁺¹.
The use of the frictional velocity in the updates of positional up-
dates resulted in less stable behavior with implicit time stepping.
With explicit time stepping, v˜ⁿ⁺¹ could be used for both position


s       n     ∆t

E,n

and velocity related updates.


vi  = vi  + mn fi(⟨Fp   ⟩).                    (10)

After forces are applied, we can process the velocities for collisions

vˢ → vⁿ⁺¹ and then apply friction vⁿ⁺¹ → v˜ⁿ⁺¹. The collision

5.5    Plasticity, hardening


processing is described in (§8).

5.3    Transfer to particles

formed by projecting the elastic deformation gradient to its yield
surface,  an action denoted by Z( ,  ) which we describe in detail
later (  7). Plasticity does not change the full deformation gradient,

so that Fⁿ⁺¹ =  FˆE,n+1FˆP,n+1  =  FE,ⁿ⁺¹FP,ⁿ⁺¹.  This allows

p                  p              p                      p              p


Next we transfer velocities from the grid back to particles. Since we
are using APIC, we need to compute new velocities vⁿ⁺¹ and affine

momentum Bⁿ⁺¹.  Velocities are interpolated back to particles in

us to update the plastic part.

FE,ⁿ⁺¹ = Z(FˆE,n+1, αⁿ)                                    (17)

p                                                                                                   
                                               p                          p                p


the straightforward way

vⁿ⁺¹ =        wⁿ v˜ⁿ⁺¹.                       (11)

i

The transfer for Bⁿ⁺¹ is

Bⁿ⁺¹ = Σ wⁿ v˜ⁿ⁺¹(xⁿ − xⁿ)T .               (12)

FP,n+1  = (FE,n+1)−1FˆE,n+1FˆP,n+1

p            p

5.6    Implicit velocity update

The implicit velocity update is

(18)


p                         ip   i            i           p

i

vⁿ⁺¹ = vⁿ +  ∆t f (⟨FE,ⁿ⁺¹⟩) + Σ ∇G   λ

(19)


Next, we update the particle’s position and deformation gradient.
Positions are updated by interpolating moving grid node positions

subject to the additional conditions Gk ≥ 0, λk ≥ 0, and Gkλk =

0.  Here, Gk(⟨xⁿ⁺¹⟩)  ≥  0, with xⁿ⁺¹  =  xⁿ + ∆tvⁿ⁺¹, is the


xn+1  =

Σ wⁿ xⁿ⁺¹.                        (13)

collision-free  criterion  for  all  object-node  collision  pairs  k.   (  8)

These forces are implicit, since FE,ⁿ⁺¹ depends on vⁿ⁺¹ through

p                         ip   i                                                                    
                                                                p                                   
            i

i                                                                                 (16), (15), and 
(17).  As in the explicit case, we complete the grid
update by applying friction vⁿ⁺¹ → v˜ⁿ⁺¹ and described in (§8).


Equation 3 is just a normal time derivative and a simple difference
yields the particle deformation gradient update

Note that we are implicit in plasticity,  but we are not implicit in
hardening  or  friction.   In  the  absence  of  plasticity,  these  are  just
the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions [Nocedal and Wright


Fn+1  = Fn + ∆t(∇v)pFn

(14)

2006] for minimization.  Unlike solving a minimization problem,


where (∇v)p  is calculated by differentiating (11)

(∇v)p  = Σ vn+1(∇wn )T .                   (15)

however, our linear systems are not generally symmetric, and we
do not have an objective with which to do line searches.

Solving the system.   Since the collision constraints are indepen-

ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 35, No. 4, Article 103, Publication Date: July 2016


103:7    •    Drucker-Prager Elastoplasticity for Sand Animation

6.2    Discrete setting

We discretize the potential energy with a sum on particles,

Ψ = Σ V ⁰ψ(FE)                                (20)


Figure 13: Varying the friction angle changes the shape of a pile of
sand. A larger angle produces a taller sand pile with steeper sides.

solve the nonlinear system of equations using Newton’s method.
Note that because of plasticity, the systems will in general be asym-
metric, and we solve with GMRES. These systems usually converge
sufficiently in three or fewer iterations of GMRES, rarely (< 1%)
taking more than four iterations. We limit GMRES to 15 iterations
and allow multiple Newton iterations.

5.7    Initialization

Particle locations are initialized with Poisson disk sampling. Initial

Note that V ⁰ is the volume of material attributed to a particle in the
initial configuration.   Only the elastic portion of the deformation
gradient FE contributes to the energy [Bonet and Wood 2008].

If the state of the system is described by a finite number of positions
x1, . . . , xm (picture a bunch of point masses connected by springs),
then the potential energy can be written Φ(x1, . . . , xm).  Moving
one of these points causes the amount of energy to change (energy
is required to stretch or compress the springs).   The springs will
push back on these points so as to release this built-up energy.  In
this way, the force felt by particle j will be fj  = − ∂Ψ .

With  MPM,  grid  nodes  are  temporarily  Lagrangian,  and  can  be
moved to define the force.  If the current grid node velocity is vi,
then its position can be approximated as xi  = xⁿ + ∆tvi. Consid-
ering a different ending position implies a different velocity to get
there.  These node velocities are used in (15) to compute (    v)p,
which is in turn used by (16) to compute a new deformation gradi-
ent FE. This deformation gradient will be used to compute energy

density using a model ψ(FE), which finally gives us total potential
energy.  In this way, the potential energy of the material can be ex-
pressed in terms of the locations of the grid nodes. We can use this
relationship, summarized below, to compute forces on grid nodes.

Ψ(⟨xi⟩) = Σ V 0ψ(FE (⟨xi⟩))                                     (21)


		

of  the  example,  with  v(x)  the  desired  initial  velocity  field.   Bⁿ

is initialized so that Cⁿ  =  Bⁿ(Dⁿ)−¹  =  ∇v is the gradient of

FE (⟨xi⟩) =

I + Σ

(xi − xn)(∇wn )T

!FE,n

(22)

the initial velocity field and Dⁿ is computed from (8).  Our initial                                
                      i

setups have no deformation, so FE,ⁿ = FE,ⁿ⁺¹ = I. We initialize


p                p

our hardening parameter with qⁿ = 0, from which we can compute

αⁿ using  (30) and  (31).   Initial  particle  volume  V ⁰ is  computed

This relationship can be differentiated to deduce the desired equa-
tion for computing grid node forces


p                                                                                                  
p

from the seeding density.

E           ∂Ψ         Σ   0∫∂ψ

E  ,    E,n  T         n


6    Forces

fi(⟨Fp ⟩) = − ∂x   = −       Vp

p

∂F (Fp )  (Fp   )   ∇wip.  (23)

Note that FE is the function parameter but FE,ⁿ is a known value

p                                                                 p


Here we derive the MPM forces on Eulerian grid nodes fi(  FE  ).
These forces are obtained by differentiating a discretization of the
potential energy with respect to the motion of grid nodes.

6.1    Continuous setting

Elastic materials are characterized by their ability to store potential
energy and then release it by doing work to cause motion (kinetic
energy). Let Ψ be the total potential energy stored by a material at
a given time.  In a real material, potential energy is stored locally
in response to deformation. This is called energy density, or energy
per unit volume,  and represented by ψ.   Since this depends only
on the local deformation, we can write ψ(F).  The function ψ(F)
captures the essential information about the way an elastic material
responds to deformation. This relationship depends on the material;
we choose our model in (§6.3).

In much the same way that total mass is computed by integrating
the density of a material over its volume Ω, potential energy is com-

 

which is not changing during the current time step.  Also note that
all deformation is assumed to be elastic. When computing the force,
the effect of further plastic flow is ignored [Bonet and Wood 2008].

Gravity. We include gravity as an additional term in (23)

grav                   n                       n

i                           ip                          i

p

6.3    Constitutive model

We adopt the energy density ψ(F) from Mast et al.  [2013].  This
model uses the same energy density as St.  Venant-Kirchhoff, but
it  replaces  the  left  Cauchy  Green  strain  with  the  Hencky  strain
¹ ln(FFT ). This makes a number of aspects of the Drucker-Prager
plastic projection very simple (see the supplementary technical doc-
ument [Kla´r et al. 2016]).  The model is most conveniently written
in terms of the singular value decomposition F = UΣVT as

ψ(F) = µtr (ln Σ)²  + 1 λ(tr(ln Σ))²,           (25)


103:8    •    G. Klár et al.

τ2                                                                                                  
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                    τ2                                              
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
    τ2

τ1                                                                                                  
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                    τ1                                              
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
    τ1

Figure 14:  A column of sand collapses into a pile.  Sand particles are colored based on their 
current plastic deformation behavior.  The
plot shows the locations of these particles in principal stress space. Green particles lie within 
the yield surface and experience no plasticity.
Blue particles are projected to the yield surface along a direction that avoids volume change. Red 
particles are experiencing tension and are
projected to the tip of the conical yield surface; these particles are separating freely with no 
stress.


where Σ is diagonal so ln Σ is computed by taking the logarithm
of the diagonal entries.   The force computation (23) requires the
derivative of this, which is

∂ψ (F) = U(2µΣ−¹ ln Σ + λtr(ln Σ)Σ−¹)VT .        (26)

∂F

7    Plasticity

7.1    Projecting to the yield surface

The only algorithmic aspect of our plasticity treatment that has not
yet been defined is our function Z(FE, αp), which projects the de-
formation gradient FE to the yield surface defined by the parameter
αp. The Drucker-Prager plasticity model is based on Coulomb fric-
tion interactions between sand particles.  In the continuum setting,
this means that the shear stress cannot be larger than a coefficient of
friction times the normal stress.  This results in a simple constraint
on the principal stresses which we derive in the supplementary tech-
nical document [Kla´r et al. 2016].

In the space of principal stress, the yield surface looks like a cone
(see Figure 15). There are three possible cases that must be consid-
ered.  If the stress lies within the yield surface (Case I), then there
is static friction between sand particles, and no plasticity occurs. If
the sand is undergoing expansion (Case II), then there is no resis-
tance to motion; this corresponds to the tip of the cone. Otherwise,
there is dynamic friction (Case III), and we should project to the
side of the cone.  Examples of these cases in an actual simulation
can be seen in Figure 14.

As with energy density, plasticity is most conveniently defined in
terms of the singular value decomposition of the deformation gra-
dient, FE = UpΣpVpT . Let sp  = ln Σp  and

to the diagonal elements. Note also that the result of this projection
Z has a straightforward singular value decomposition (Up  and Vp
do not change), and this decomposition will be required when com-
puting the force.  We avoid the extra decomposition by returning
the diagonal part (Σp, I, or eHᵖ ) rather than the full result (FE,
UpVpT , or UpeHᵖ VpT ).

7.2    Note on preventing undesired volume change

The method as described has the desirable feature that sand is pre-
vented from compressing arbitrarily as a byproduct of losing vol-
ume in the plasticity projection.  To see this, note that a change in
det(FE) corresponds to a change in volume of the elastic deforma-

tion. In Case I, FE is unchanged, so volume is not changed. In Case
II, the sand expands,  and volume should be gained.   In Case III,
the sand deforms plasticly and an associative flow rule [Bonet and

τ₂

τ₁


ˆs  = s −  tr(sp) I     δγ

= ǁˆs ǁ

+ dλ + 2µ tr(s )α

(27)


where d is the spatial dimension and δγp  is the amount of plastic
deformation.  If δγp        0, then the candidate FE is already in the

yield  surface  and  should  be  returned  without  modification  (Case
I). If   ˆsp   F   =  0 or tr(sp)  >  0,  then we need to project to the

cone’s tip (Case II), in which case we should return UpVpT . Oth-
erwise, we should project to the cone surface (Case III) by returning
UpeHᵖ VpT , where

ˆsp

Figure 15: The yield surface for Drucker-Prager is shown in prin-
ciple stretch space.  The yield surface has the shape of a cone with
its tip at the origin,  which corresponds to no stress.   Green par-
ticles are inside the yield surface and exhibit an elastic response.
Blue particles are under compression but experience more shear


Hp  = sp − δγp ǁˆs ǁ

(28)

than friction allows. These configurations are projected to the yield
surface along a direction that avoids volume change. Red particles


Note that the operations ln Σp  and eHᵖ involve diagonal matrices,
so that the logarithm and exponential functions are simply applied

ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 35, No. 4, Article 103, Publication Date: July 2016

are experiencing tension and are projected to the tip of the conical
yield surface. These particles separate freely without stress.


103:9    •    Drucker-Prager Elastoplasticity for Sand Animation

φF                                                                                                  
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
              τ2                                                                                    
    φF                                                                                              
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                  τ2                                                                                
        φF                                                                                          
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                      τ2

τ1                                                                                                  
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                    τ1                                              
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
    τ1

q                                                                                                   
                                                                                                    
 q                                                                                                  
                                                                                                    
  q

Figure 16:  Three particles in a collapsing pile of sand are colored for reference.  As these 
particles deform plasticly, their yield surface
changes as they undergo hardening, resulting in a wider cone for projection. Hardening causes each 
particle to have its own yield surface.

Wood 2008] would lead to excessive volume gain.  Instead, noting           Since  xⁿ⁺¹ will  be  
computed  based  on  vⁿ⁺¹,  one  could  adjust

p                                                                                   i

that tr(ˆsp)  =  0, the Drucker-Prager model uses a non-associative           vn+1  to enforce 
φ(xn+1)  ≥  0.   While this would likely lead to

flow to preserve volume during the plastic projection                                    i          
                             p


det(UpeHp VpT ) = etr(Hp)  = etr(sp)  = det(Σp) = det(FE ).

The key to retaining volume in this case is to ensure that tr(Hp) =
tr(sp), which means the projection to the cone should locate the
closest point on the cone that does not change the trace, rather than

the closest point on the cone.  We discuss this in more detail in the
supplementary technical document [Kla´r et al. 2016].

7.3    Hardening

We adopt the hardening model of Mast et al. [2014], where plastic
deformation can increase the friction between sand particles.  The
amount of hardening depends on the amount of correction that oc-
curred due to plasticity. In Case I, no plasticity occurred, so δq   =

good  results,  it  complicates  collision  processing  in  both  the  ex-
plicit  and  implicit  cases.   Instead,  we  process  collisions  against
the nodes themselves as in [Gast et al. 2015].  This is difficult be-
cause φ(xⁿ⁺¹)       0 does not make sense.  There should be grid
nodes inside obstacles.  A set of constraints Gk(  xⁿ⁺¹ )       0 or
Gk(  xⁿ⁺¹ ) = 0 on grid nodes is needed that avoid collisions for
particles, at least approximately, but which can be applied indepen-
dently per grid node in an straightforward manner. This depends on
the type of collision being applied.  We support three types of col-
lisions: sticky, slipping, and separating. Note that a grid node must
have received mass during the transfer in order to be considered for
a collision constraint of any type.

Sticky.   Sticky  collisions  enforce  that  a  point  remains  fixed  to  a
particular reference point on the collision object.  We enforce this
by  requiring  vⁿ⁺¹  =  vⁿ⁺¹,  where  vⁿ⁺¹ is  the  velocity  of  the


0. In Case II, all of the stress was removed, so δqp  = ǁsE,ⁿ⁺¹ǁF .

collision object at the candidate position. In terms of positions, this

is G  (xⁿ⁺¹) = xⁿ⁺¹ − xⁿ − ∆tvⁿ⁺¹ = 0. The constraint can be


In each case, δqp  ≥ 0. We define our hardening update using

qⁿ⁺¹ = qⁿ + δq                                           (29)

enforced by directly setting the velocity.

Separating.   Separating constraints have two cases.   If a node is


p               p            p

already  inside  a  collision  body  (φ(xⁿ)  <  0),  then  it  should  not


n+1

−h2 q

n+1                  n


φF p  = h0 + (h1qp     − h3)e

p                             (30)

penetrate any deeper, φ(xi      )  ≥  φ(xi ).  If a node is originally

outside the object (φ(xⁿ)  ≥  0) then it should remain φ(xⁿ⁺¹)  ≥

r 2   2 sin φF                                                                                ⁱ     
                                                                              ⁱ

3 3 − sin φ                                                              n


F p

The quantity qⁿ is the hardening state, φF     is often referred to as

min(φ(xi ), 0). Note that movement along and away from the col-
lision object are fully permitted by this rule, even if the collision
surface is curved. An unsatisfied constraint of the form φ(xi) ≥ a


the friction angle, the internal coefficient of friction is tan φF p, and

(30) models a curve with a maximum and an asymptote.  Plausible

values  of  φF p  lie  in  [0, π ),  with  φF p   =  0  behaving  as  a  fluid.
Feasible hardening parameters satisfy h0  > h3       0 and h1, h2

0. The values we use are listed in Table 3. Figure 16 illustrates the
change in yield surface as particles undergo hardening in 2D.

8    Collisions

We separate our collision response into two distinct steps: resolving
the actual collision and applying friction. The motivation for this is
that the collision response can be added into the implicit solve, but
doing the same for friction would be more difficult.  In the explicit
case, this separation does not matter.

We use a signed distance function φ(x) to represent each obstacle,
with the convention that negative is inside the object and positive
is outside. If we could process particles for collisions directly, then
the collision constraint would be φ(xⁿ⁺¹)       0.  In practice, pro-
cessing collisions directly on particles produces poor results, since
it  causes  xⁿ⁺¹ and  FE,ⁿ⁺¹ to  get  out  of  sync.   This  can  cause

or φ(xi) = a can be enforced by xi  ← xi − (φ(xi) − a)∇φ(xi),
noting that ∇φ is the normal direction.

Figure 17:  Sand is poured into a pile with APIC (left) and FLIP
(right) transfers.  FLIP tends to accumulate spurious velocities on

ᵖ              ᵖ                                                                  particles.  In 
some cases, FLIP leads to unstable behavior, as was


objects to slowly seep into the ground.  Instead, it is necessary to
process collisions using the grid velocities.

the case in this simulation.

ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 35, No. 4, Article 103, Publication Date: July 2016


103:10    •    G. Klár et al.

Figure 18: Comparison on notched sand block fall. Initial (left), ours (middle), and Narain et al. 
[2010] (right).


Slipping.  For a slipping constraint, we do not want to allow sep-
aration for existing collisions, but sliding along the surface is per-
mitted.  If a node is already inside a collision body (φ(xⁿ)  < 0),

then it should stay at its current depth,  φ(xⁿ⁺¹)  =  φ(xⁿ).   If a

each particle as a matte sphere.  The color of each particle is ran-
domly chosen from yellow (RGB 225/169/95 with a probability
of 0.85), brown (RGB 107/84/30 with a probability of 0.1) and
white  (RGB  255/255/255  with  a  probability  of  0.05)  to  further

i                               i


node is originally outside the object (φ(xⁿ)      0) then no collision
constraint  is  enforced.   By  not  enforcing  this  constraint  for  non-
penetrating nodes,  penetration becomes possible and leads to en-
forcement in the next time step.  Slipping constraints are enforced
as        in the separating case.

With a mathematical description for the constraints for all cases and
a method for directly enforcing those constraints,  direct enforce-
ment (vˢ → vⁿ⁺¹) is all that is required for the explicit case. The

improve realism. All scenes were rendered using SideFX’s Mantra.
For  scenes  with  rapidly  flowing  sand  (such  as  the  hourglass)  we
turned on motion blur where appropriate.

10    Results

Flowing and Piling. We demonstrate the accuracy of our model by
showing the characteristic behaviors of sand flowing and piling. In

Figure 1, we simulate sand flowing inside an hourglass.  The sand


implicit case uses the constraints Gk that have been defined in order
to couple collision enforcement with force application (§5.6).

8.1    Friction

To apply friction,  we look not at the manner in which collisions
were enforced but the effect that this enforcement had on the veloc-
ities.  In the explicit case, velocities before (vˢ) and after (vⁿ⁺¹)

forms a smooth granular flow and piles up at the bottom. Figure 12
shows a stream of sand inflow hitting a high frictional surface. We
compare this simulation with real world footage.  Our model suc-
cessfully  captures  the  interesting  avalanche  instability  [Yoshioka
2003] of this experiment.

Easy  Tuning.    We  list  the  parameters  used  in  our  examples  in

i                             i                     Table 3 and the runtime performance of those 
simulations in Ta-


are already available.  ∆vi   =  vⁿ⁺¹    vˢ is the velocity change
attributable to collisions.

In the implicit case, the collision contribution is from the last term
of Equation 19.   We compute the velocity estimate before forces

ble  2.   In  Figure  13,  we  simulate  columns  of  dry  sand  with  dif-
ferent friction angles collapsing on the ground.  Different friction
angles  directly  affect  the  interaction  between  sand  grains,  there-
fore the final piling angle. While the real Young’s modulus of sand


as    ˢ

n         ∆t

E,n+1

.  Although

ⁿ⁺¹ would be the

is 3.537 × 10⁷, we found that sometimes choosing a moderately


vi  =  vi  +  mn fi(⟨Fp       ⟩)                    vi

after-collision velocity if the implicit solve had converged, this is
not often done in practice.  Instead, we repeat collision processing
on vˢ to compute the difference for ∆vi.

For both cases, ∆vi  is the velocity change that collisions caused.
Corresponding to this,  an impulse  j  =  mⁿ∆vi  must have been
applied.  Since each node participates in at most one collision (the
constraints do not mix), the normal direction n is known. (If it were
not, it could be approximated as n  =    ʲ  .)  This divides velocity

ǁjǁ

into normal and tangential parts: vin  = n·vⁿ⁺¹ and vit  = vⁿ⁺¹ −

smaller value does not change the visual appearance. In Figure 10,
we show 2D inflow simulations with different Young’s modulus. A
moderately smaller Young’s modulus improves the efficiency of the
implicit solve. However, the material may exhibit jiggling behavior
if it is too small. We assert physically accurate Young’s modulus is
always the best choice unless an artistic elastic effect is desirable.

Two-way Coupling. The benefits of using MPM include automatic
self collision and coupling between different materials. In Figure 3,
we show an elastic ball interacting with a dry sand castle.  MPM
naturally handles the two-way coupling without requiring any ad-


i

nv   . The tangential direction is t =    ᵛⁱᵗ

ditional treatment other than assigning different constitutive models


in                                                                   ǁvitǁ . The Coulomb friction

to different particles.

law limits the amount of friction that can be applied to µbǁjǁ, where


µb

µb is the coefficient of friction.  If ǁvitǁ  ≤         ǁjǁ, then friction

Drawing and Scooping.  We further demonstrate the versatility of


suffices to eliminate tangential motion entirely, and v˜n+1  = nvin.

n+1          n+1        µb

i                 i                 n
i

9    Render

Zhu and Bridson [2005] render sand with a reconstructed surface.
Narain et al.  [2010] associate a number of render points sampled
near each particle for high resolution rendering.  In our examples
we have a sufficient number of simulated particles to simply render

ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 35, No. 4, Article 103, Publication Date: July 2016

our method by performing various tasks in a sand box.  Figure 8
shows  drawing  a  butterfly  with  a  wooden  stick.   Figure  5  shows
raking sand in a Zen garden. Figure 11 shows scooping sand.

APIC Stability.  Our method benefits from the APIC particle/grid
transfers [Jiang 2015; Jiang et al. 2015] due to its stability and low
numerical dissipation.  In Figure 17, we run a 2D inflow simula-
tion  and compare our result with Mast et al.  [2013; 2014] where
a traditional FLIP transfer scheme is used.  With the same material
parameters and time step sizes, our method does not suffer from the


103:11    •    Drucker-Prager Elastoplasticity for Sand Animation

Frame rate    Min/frame    Scheme          ∆t             Particle #       Threads     CPU          
  ∆x        Grid resolution   Particles/cell
Castle               72            6.80       Implicit    1 × 10−³       7.95 × 10⁵        4      
†2.67GHz       0.01     300 × 140 × 200         8

Friction angle        120           4.10       Explicit    1 × 10−⁴       1.20 × 10⁶        4      
‡3.33GHz      0.001     432 × 144 × 432        32

Hourglass            48            2.00       Explicit    1 × 10−⁴       4.60 × 10⁵       12    
y3.00GHz    0.0025    160 × 360 × 160         8

Butterfly             24           10.31      Explicit   2.5 × 10−⁴      3.84 × 10⁶       10    
y3.00GHz    0.0045     220 × 55 × 220          8

Butterfly close         48           21.23      Explicit    1 × 10−⁴        4.1 × 10⁶         8     
y3.00GHz    0.0014    280 × 140 × 210         2

Raking               24            9.78       Explicit   2.5 × 10−⁴      3.84 × 10⁶       10    
y3.00GHz    0.0045     220 × 55 × 220          8

Raking close          24           32.84      Explicit    1 × 10−⁴        4.3 × 10⁶         8     
◦2.90GHz    0.0021     336 × 96 × 288          2

Pile from spout       120           4.34       Implicit   1.5 × 10−⁴      9.94 × 10⁵        8      
†2.67GHz   0.00083    240 × 96 × 240         32

Splash              240           9.27       Explicit    5 × 10−⁵        6.6 × 10⁶         8      
§3.47GHz     0.0078    256 × 256 × 256         9

Shovel               24           24.84      Explicit    1 × 10−⁴       1.96 × 10⁶        4      
§3.47GHz      0.005     160 × 100 × 100         8

Young’s modulus      24        49 × 10−⁴  Implicit   7.5 × 10−⁴  742/739/746/745     1      
†2.67GHz      0.016          256 × 64                4

Table 2: Simulation performance. Note that ∆t denotes the maximum allowed time step size. The 
actual ∆t is adaptive and may be restricted
by CFL condition when the particle velocities are high.  In all of our simulations we use a CFL 
number of 1, i.e., we don’t allow particles
to move further than ∆x in a time step.  CPU types used are: †Intel Xeon X5650, ‡Intel Xeon W3680, 
ˢIntel Xeon E5-2690 v2, ◦Intel Xeon
E5-2690, §Intel Xeon X5690.


unstable ringing instability like FLIP does. We further show the ro-
bustness and stability of our method in a 3D energetic scenario. In
Figure 2, a rigid ball is dropped into a 1m    1m    0.35m sand box
with impact speed 6m/s.  The impact dynamics are stable and al-
most noise-free, resulting in a smooth and symmetric crown splash
visual appearance.

Comparison with the state-of-the-art method.  We compare the
result of our method with the algorithm proposed by Narain et al.
[2010] for the collapse of a column of granular material. The results
shown in Figure 18 are at 150     100     150 grid resolution. Perfor-
mance data for this example at a variety of resolutions is shown in
Table 4. Two particle counts (initial and final) are listed for Narain
et al., since their particle counts tend to increase over time due to
particle splitting and merging.  Although their algorithm runs 8.7
times faster at the highest resolution, our algorithm avoids the stair-
casing  artifact  and  is  able  to  produce  a  less  viscous  flow  of  dry
cohesion-less granular materials.

11    Discussion and Limitations

Limitations.  There are methods that are much faster, for example
the position based dynamics approach in Macklin et al.  [2014] or
other existing continuum approaches such as Narain et al.  [2010].
However,  when  realism  and  intuitively  designed  parameters  are
more important than raw performance, our method provides an al-
ternative with competitive computational expense.  Also, although
the framework would generalize to a wide range of yield surfaces
and  elastic  potentials,  we  only  investigated  the  Drucker-Prager
model. However, the Drucker-Prager cone is only equivalent to the
Coulomb friction shear/normal-stress relation in two dimensions.
In  three  dimensions,  the  elastic  regime  is  described  by  the  more
complicated region in the Mohr-Coulomb model, but the Drucker-
Prager model is a decent approximation [Mast 2013].

Future work.   In future work,  we will investigate a wider range
of  plastic  flows  and  yield  surfaces  and  the  effect  of  cohesion  in
modeling soil or wet-sands.  We would also like to investigate the
importance of hardening to visual simulation of sand.

Discussion.   We note that explicit time stepping was often faster
than implicit time stepping.  Although implicit steps are generally
larger than explicit, the cost required to solve the nonlinear equa-
tions of the implicit step was often larger than just taking more inex-
pensive explicit steps. Improvements in stability of explicit integra-
tion may be partly due to a better position update and APIC trans-
fers providing more stability than FLIP/PIC blends as in Stomakhin
et al. [2013], whose implicit scheme also benefited from a symmet-
ric treatment.  Tuning time step and solver tolerances proved diffi-
cult to optimize, requiring different values for different examples.

Acknowledgements

The  authors  were  partially  supported  by  NSF  CCF-1422795,
ONR (N000141110719,  N000141210834),  DOD (W81XWH-15-

1-0147), Intel STC-Visual Computing Grant (20112360) as well as
a gift from Disney Research. We would also like to thank R. Narain
for providing invaluable assistance in comparing with their method.

References

ALDUA´ N,  I.,  AND  OTADUY,  M.   2011.   SPH granular flow with
friction  and  cohesion.    In  Proc  ACM  SIGGRAPH/Eurograph
Symp Comp Anim, 25–32.

ALDUA´ N, I., TENA, A., AND  OTADUY, M.  2009.  Simulation of

high-resolution granular media. In Proc Cong Espan˜ol Inf Graf.

BARDENHAGEN,  S.,  BRACKBILL,  J.,  AND  SULSKY,  D.   2000.

The material-point method for granular materials.  Comp Meth
App Mech Eng 187, 3–4, 529–541.

BELL, N., YU, Y., AND  MUCHA, P.  2005.  Particle-based simula-
tion of granular materials. In Proc ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurograph
Symp Comp Anim, 77–86.

BONET, J., AND WOOD, R. 2008. Nonlinear continuum mechanics
for finite element analysis. Cambridge University Press.

CHANCLOU, B., LUCIANI, A., AND  HABIBI, A.  1996.  Physical

models of loose soils dynamically marked by a moving object.
In Comp Anim, 27–35.

CHANG,  Y.,  BAO,  K.,  ZHU,  J.,  AND  WU,  E.  2012.  A particle-

based method for granular flow simulation. Sci China Inf Sci 55,
5, 1062–1072.

                                   ρ            E           ν    Friction angle    h₀/h₁/h₂/h₃

Castle             2200    3.537    10⁵   0.3             —               35/0/0.2/10

Friction angle       2200    3.537    10⁵   0.3   20/25/30/35/40            —

Hourglass          2200    3.537    10⁵   0.3             —               35/9/0.3/10

Butterfly           2200    3.537    10⁵   0.3             —               35/9/0.2/10

Butterfly close      2200    3.537    10⁵   0.3             —               35/9/0.2/10

Raking            2200    3.537    10⁵   0.3             —               35/9/0.2/10

Raking close        2200    3.537    10⁵   0.3             —               35/9/0.2/10

Pile from spout      2200    3.537    10⁵   0.3             30                      —

Splash             1582    3.537    10⁶   0.3             22                      —

Shovel             2200    3.537    10⁵   0.3             —               35/9/0.2/10

Young’s modulus    2200       10³,⁴,⁵,⁶      0.3             —               35/9/0.3/10

Table 3: Material parameters are provided for all of our 3D simu-
lations.  Friction angle φF  and hardening parameters h0, h1, and
h3 are listed in degrees for convenience.

ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 35, No. 4, Article 103, Publication Date: July 2016


103:12    •    G. Klár et al.

CHEN, P., AND  WONG, S.  2013.  Real-time auto stylized sand art
drawing. In CAD Comp Graph, 439–440.

CUMMINS,  S.,  AND  BRACKBILL,  J.  2002.  An implicit particle-
in-cell method for granular materials. J Comp Phys 180, 2, 506–
548.

DRUCKER, D., AND  PRAGER, W.  1952. Soil mechanics and plas-
ticity analysis or limit design. Quart App Math 10, 157–165.

GAST,  T.,  SCHROEDER,  C.,  STOMAKHIN,  A.,  JIANG,  C.,  AND

TERAN,  J.  2015.  Optimization integrator for large time steps.

IEEE Trans Vis Comp Graph 21, 10, 1103–1115.

GONZALEZ, O., AND  STUART, A.  2008.  A first course in contin-
uum mechanics. Cambridge University Press.

IHMSEN,  M.,  WAHL,  A.,  AND  TESCHNER,  M.    2013.    A  la-

grangian framework for simulating granular material with high
detail. Comp Graph 37, 7, 800–808.

JAEGER,  H.,  NAGEL,  S.,  AND  BEHRINGER,  R.  1996.  Granular

solids, liquids, and gases. Rev Mod Phys 68, 1259–1273.

JIANG, C., SCHROEDER, C., SELLE, A., TERAN, J., AND STOM-

AKHIN, A. 2015. The affine particle-in-cell method. ACM Trans
Graph 34, 4, 51:1–51:10.

JIANG, C.  2015.  The material point method for the physics-based
simulation of solids and fluids.  PhD thesis, University of Cali-
fornia, Los Angeles.

KLA´ R, G., GAST, T., PRADHANA, A., FU, C., SCHROEDER, C.,

JIANG,  C.,  AND  TERAN,  J.  2016.  Drucker-prager elastoplas-
ticity  for  sand  animation:  Supplementary  technical  document.
ACM Trans Graph.

LENAERTS, T., AND  DUTRE´, P.  2009. Mixing fluids and granular
materials. Comp Graph Forum 28, 2, 213–218.

LI, X., AND MOSHELL, J. 1993. Modeling soil: realtime dynamic
models for soil slippage and manipulation. In Proc SIGGRAPH,
361–368.

LUCIANI, A., HABIBI, A., AND  MANZOTTI, E.  1995.  A multi-

scale physical model of granular materials.  In Proc Graph Int,
136–146.

MACKLIN,  M.,  MU¨ LLER,  M.,  CHENTANEZ,  N.,  AND  KIM,  T.

2014.  Unified particle physics for real-time applications.  ACM
Trans Graph 33, 4, 153:1–153:12.

MAST,  C.,  ARDUINO,  P.,  MACKENZIE-HELNWEIN,  P.,  AND

MILLER, R.  2014.  Simulating granular column collapse using
the material point method. Acta Geotech 10, 1, 101–116.

MAST, C. 2013. Modeling landslide-induced flow interactions with
structures using the Material Point Method. PhD thesis.

MAZHAR, H., HEYN, T., NEGRUT, D., AND  TASORA, A.  2015.

Using Nesterov’s method to accelerate multibody dynamics with
friction and contact. ACM Trans Graph 34, 3, 32:1–32:14.

MILENKOVIC,  V.   1996.   Position-based physics:  simulating the
motion  of  many  highly  interacting  spheres  and  polyhedra.   In
Proc SIGGRAPH, 129–136.

MILLER, G., AND  PEARCE, A.  1989.  Globular dynamics: a con-
nected particle system for animating viscous fluids. Comp Graph
13, 3, 305–309.

NARAIN, R., GOLAS, A., AND LIN, M. 2010. Free-flowing gran-

ular materials with two-way solid coupling.  ACM Trans Graph
29, 6, 173:1–173:10.

ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 35, No. 4, Article 103, Publication Date: July 2016

Grid resolution           Method       Sec/Frame            Particles

10     15     10           Ours             0.085             1.5K     

Narain           0.019         1.8 − 2.4K

20     30     20           Ours               1.1                12K      

Narain            0.16           13 − 20K

50     75     50           Ours                33               188K     

Narain             3.4          194 − 330K

100     150     100        Ours              540               1.5M     

Narain              62           1.5 − 2.7M

Table 4: Performance comparison with Narain et al. [2010].

NKULIKIYIMFURA, D., KIM, J., AND KIM, H. 2012. A real-time

sand simulation using a GPU.   In Comp Tech Inf Man,  vol. 1,
495–498.

NOCEDAL, J., AND  WRIGHT, S.  2006.  Numerical Optimization.
Springer series in operations research and financial engineering.
Springer.

ONOUE,  K.,  AND  NISHITA,  T.   2003.  Virtual sandbox.  In Proc
Pac Conf Comp Graph App, 252–262.

PLA-CASTELLS, M., GARCIA-FERNANDEZ, I., AND MARTINEZ,

R.   2006.   Interactive terrain simulation and force distribution
models in sand piles. In Cellular Automata, vol. 4173 of Lecture
Notes Comp Sci. 392–401.

RAM, D., GAST, T., JIANG, C., SCHROEDER, C., STOMAKHIN,
A., TERAN, J., AND  KAVEHPOUR, P.  2015.  A material point

method for viscoelastic fluids, foams and sponges. In Proc ACM
SIGGRAPH/Eurograph Symp Comp Anim, 157–163.

STEFFEN, M., KIRBY, R. M., AND  BERZINS, M.  2008.  Analysis

and reduction of quadrature errors in the material point method
(MPM). Int J Numer Meth Eng 76, 6, 922–948.

STOMAKHIN,  A.,  SCHROEDER,  C.,  CHAI,  L.,  TERAN,  J.,  AND

SELLE, A.  2013. A material point method for snow simulation.

ACM Trans Graph 32, 4, 102:1–102:10.

STOMAKHIN,   A.,   SCHROEDER,   C.,   JIANG,   C.,   CHAI,   L.,

TERAN, J., AND SELLE, A. 2014. Augmented MPM for phase-
change and varied materials.  ACM Trans Graph 33, 4, 138:1–
138:11.

SULSKY, D., CHEN, Z., AND  SCHREYER, H. L.  1994.  A parti-

cle method for history-dependent materials.  Comp Meth in App
Mech Eng 118, 1, 179–196.

SUMNER, R., O’BRIEN, J., AND  HODGINS, J.  1999.  Animating

sand, mud and snow. Comp Graph Forum 18, 1, 17–26.

YASUDA,  R.,  HARADA,  T.,  AND  KAWAGUCHI,  Y.  2008.  Real-

time simulation of granular materials using graphics hardware.
In Comp Graph Imag Vis, 28–31.

YOSHIOKA,  N.    2003.   A  sandpile  experiment  and  its  implica-
tions for self-organized criticality and characteristic earthquake.
Earth, planets and space 55, 6, 283–289.

YUE,  Y.,  SMITH,  B.,  BATTY,  C.,  ZHENG,  C.,  AND  GRINSPUN,

E.  2015.  Continuum foam:  a material point method for shear-
dependent flows. ACM Trans Graph 34, 5, 160:1–160:20.

ZHU,  Y.,  AND  BRIDSON,  R.   2005.   Animating sand as a fluid.

ACM Trans Graph 24, 3, 965–972.

