TimeAdaption
TimeAdaption
Handle time-dependent adaptive mesh refinement parameters.
Syntax
model.sol(sname).feature(solv).create(fname, " TimeAdaption " )
model.sol(sname).feature(solv).feature(fname).set(pname,value)
Description
Handles settings for time-dependent adaptive mesh refinement. This feature can be added to a solver of the Time Dependent type.
The TimeAdaption feature splits the overall time range into subintervals, and in each interval an adapted mesh is generated and used. The meshes for these intervals as well as the solutions are added to the model. The solutions are stored in one container node ( model.sol() ) to facilitate the result processing.
The feature TimeAdaption accepts the following properties
Table 6-75: Valid TimeAdaption Properties.
Property
Value
Default
Description
consistentrestart
on | off
off
Consistent initialization after restart.
clist
String array
Provide values for constants as input parameters using a string array; for the corresponding constant names, use cname . See The clist and cname Properties .
cname
String array
Provide names of constants as input parameters using a string array; for the corresponding constant values, use clist . See The clist and cname Properties .
convertmesh
on | off
on
Convert to simplex mesh.
eefuntime
user
user
Error indicator function.
eefunctime
String
Error indicator name (eefuntime=user).
elfrac
positive scalar
0.2
Fraction of maximum refinement if tauto=automatic .
elselect
globalmin | worst | elements
Method for selecting elements to refine.
elselectauto
globalmin
Method for selecting elements to refine if tauto=automatic .
gf
positive scalar
2
Interval growth factor.
globalminpar
positive scalar
Controls refinement if elselect=globalmin .
globalminparauto
positive scalar
Controls refinement if elselectauto=globalmin .
initialsteprestart
positive scalar
0.001
Initial time step size after restart.
initialsteprestartactive
maxrefinement
scalar integer
5
Maximum number of element refinements.
message
String
The log message from the last solution process.
minti
positive scalar
0.01
Minimal length of adaptation time intervals.
rf
positive scalar
0.5
Interval reduction factor.
rmethod
regular | longest
longest
Refinement method.
samplepts
scalar | numeric vector
range(0,0.1,1)
Where to check the error in next subinterval.
tauto
manual | automatic
manual
Time interval control.
tfrac
positive scalar
0.1
Length of adaptation time intervals.
tfracauto
positive scalar
0.1
Length of initial adaptation time interval if tauto=automatic .
timeadapgeom
String
Name of geometry sequence.
worstpar
positive scalar
Controls refinement if elselect=worst .
Time adaptation
The TimeAdaption algorithm solves a sequence of problems on a sequence of adapted meshes. The first mesh, the base mesh, is obtained from the meshing sequence. The new adapted mesh is obtained by evaluating the mesh element error indicator, selecting a set of elements based on the element pick function, and then finally refining these elements. The solution to the problem on the previous mesh is then mapped to the new mesh and time integration continues until the next mesh adaptation takes place. The time of mesh adaptation can be determined manually or automatically.
The time adaptive solver works in one geometry at a time. You specify the name of the geometry sequence in the property timeadapgeom . The solver only supports simplex meshes, and if the base mesh is not simplex it can be converted by using the property convertmesh .
The length of the time interval using a fixed adapted spatial mesh can be controlled manually or automatically by the property tauto . If the time integrator runs into problems the computation is restarted at the beginning of the previous time interval. The length of the new interval is reduced to a fraction of the current interval length. This fraction is specified by the property rf . In the tauto=manual case the time interval length is given by property tfrac ; if tauto=automatic the property tfracauto controls the initial interval length. For both cases the shortest possible interval length is given by the property minti .
If the property tauto is set to automatic the TimeAdaption algorithm tries to determine the length of the time interval according to the requested fraction of maximum refinement. The fraction is given by the value of the property elfrac . A value of zero means no refinement of the base mesh and a value of one means refinement everywhere with the maximum number of refinements (set through property ngenlocal ). The algorithm strives to assume the given value of elfrac by controlling the size of the time interval. The shortening and lengthening of the interval is determined by the interval reduction and growth factors. These are the properties rf and gf , respectively.
The error indicator is specified using the property eefunctime . A solution on the coarse base mesh is computed in the next time interval and the error indicator is evaluated at the points given by property samplepts . In this way a new adapted mesh appropriate for the next time interval can be generated and the computation on this new mesh is then started. The sample points must be specified as a number between 0 and 1 because they are interpreted as being relative to the time interval under consideration. Entering a scalar value of 0.5 means that the error indicator is evaluated at the midpoint of the interval.
After each mesh adaptation the time integration is restarted and you can control the time stepping by the Time type analogous properties consistentrestart and initialsteprestart .
Compatibility
The property ngenlocal in versions prior to 5.5 has been renamed to maxrefinement .
